We just learned that as we pass training data through our model,
we evaluate our loss function on both the training and validation sets.
So we have a training loss and a validation loss at the end of
each epoch that we can use to monitor our model's performance.
But how do we know when enough is enough?
Recall that the training loss and validation loss measures to how well
the CNN performs on training data and validation data respectively.
Lower loss means higher performance.
If your algorithm is learning from your training data,
after several epochs, you will see this training loss go down.
Since the validation is something that the algorithm has never seen,
if your algorithm is truly learning about what the real-world looks like,
you will also start to see the validation loss go down.
Over many epochs, you will likely see
your training loss continue to decrease as your model
learns the features that discriminate classes in
this particular set of images better and better.
At a certain point however,
you will see your loss plateau,
because your model cannot learn how to discriminate between
image classes any better with its current architecture and parameters.
Now, while this may look great,
in that our model learned a lot about how to discriminate classes in our training data,
what we really care about is how it's performing on our validation data,
or the data that it is not using to update its weights from.
Oftentimes, we'll see something that looks like this,
where our validation loss dips,
then rises, then dips again and plateaus.
When we see this happen where our model is
still learning how to better classify our training data,
but not our validation data, it's called Overfitting.
The best validation loss that our model achieved was actually way back here,
when it was lowest.
So technically, that's when our network stopped learning.
This would be considered the best epoch
for which you might want to stop and save your filter weights.
What we really want to see however are smooth loss functions like this,
where we can see loss decreases in both training
and validation data over a longer period of time.
We can then save our weights at the point that's more stable.
When we train a model,
we use a function in Keras called Fit generator,
where we give it our training and validation data.
We can set an output of this training to a variable called history.
Then we can use the different fields of this history variable to
extract lost values from our training and validation sets over time.
This can be helpful for plotting our performance after.